# A Comparative Analysis between Pre-Pandemic Education and Today and its Impact to Learning.

## Introduction

The world has altered since the COVID-19 pandemic broke out. It has had a significant impact on the global economic, political, and cultural landscape due to the virus's unique characteristics, mainly how it spreads. Furthermore, the measures taken by states to control the spread of the virus have exacerbated poverty and discrimination in many parts of the world, not only because COVID-19 appears to be affecting poorer communities more than the wealthy but also because of the measures taken by states to control the virus's spread, primarily by imposing community quarantine, lockdowns, and curfews in many parts of the world. For both public and private higher education institutions, this means rethinking how students interact with each other and how classes are organized. Everyone acclimated to working from home, from operations and support service units to administrators and teachers. Course syllabus and prerequisites have to be revised and adjusted when the focus switches to alternative or remote teaching methods, including synchronous and asynchronous delivery. Where students and teachers had access to electronic devices and stable Internet connections such as Canvas, Moodle, and Blackboard and applications such as Google Hangouts, Zoom, and Skype, learning management systems were employed. Text messaging, email, Facebook Messenger, and Twitter were utilized by teachers and students in classrooms when computers were inaccessible, or the Internet was unreliable. Several colleges were forced to discontinue remote or online classes due to the disparity in student socioeconomic levels, making these options unworkable for some students. 

Education is essential in almost every country around the world. Even though each country has its educational system, most countries have a similar concept or equivalent qualifications. The education system in the Philippines is unique in that it incorporates influences from its colonial history. The colonization of Malaysia, China, Spain, and America has had a significant impact on the education system in the Philippines. However, much of the country's current educational system is modeled after American educational practices. In the Philippines, a thirteen-year education is required by law. These thirteen years, known as the K-12 program, lasted from kindergarten to grade twelve. Following that, students can choose whether or not to pursue further education. The Department of Education (DepEd) is in charge of primary (pre-university) education in the Philippines. The Commission on Higher Education is in charge of tertiary and graduate education, while the Technical Education and Skills Development Authority (TESDA) is in charge of technical-vocational courses and middle education.

Even before COVID-19 hit, causing troubles for millions of families, the country's financial situation was one of the primary reasons for the Philippines' expanding education challenges. Furthermore, more children, teens, and adults are falling behind due to unequal access to learning. In the future, such difficulties may have far-reaching consequences. Now, we will look at the present situation and how we may become involved in social initiatives to combat these major issues in our nation.

The majority of the problems in the Philippines' education system are caused by a lack of funding, which includes low teacher salaries, a lack of classrooms, and a lack of facilities such as laboratories. The Philippine Constitution required the government to allow the most significant percentage of its resources allocation of funds to education. However, among the ASEAN countries, The Philippines is still one of the poorest countries in the world. This is attributable to several factors, major political issues, and colossal difficulties that the government is mainly affected by corruption. Furthermore, there is a lack of educational equality across regions: government policy favors schools near Manila, with areas farthest from the capital (such as Mindanao) showing lower levels of student performance.

The Philippines does not invest in high-quality education. Despite the digital era, many public schools lack computers and other equipment. A shortage of public school teachers is one of the country's most pressing challenges, owing to their status as the lowest-paid state employees. Aside from that, more than 3 million children, teenagers, and adults have been left out of school since the closure. Living in a perpetual state of crisis has long-term consequences. Misinformation, as well as poor decision-making and other societal issues, are examples of these.
	
Students' performance stems from different factors such as rest and sleep, mental health, and enriching activities. The majority of the education system in the Philippines usually starts at 7 a.m and usually ends around 4p.m, with the class being too early and the course being too long. It affects students' performance to focus and be productive alongside the long class hours. The class hours usually take the majority of the students' time and do not even include the homework and other activities provided by the school and its professors; this, in turn, affects the rest and after-school activities of students, which leads to a conflict of schedule. Although students spending more time in school does not equate to being educated, recent studies show increased pressure and stress on students' well being.

## Statement of the Problem

This research aims to look at the education systems of the Philippines during the pandemic and compare them to pre-pandemic eras. This study aims to determine the following:

1. The efficiency of the education system.
2. The statistics of enrollment and graduates in State Universities and Colleges.
3. The educational methods utilized by schools in the Philippines as they shift from face-to-face classes to online learning. 

Academics should be a priority in school because education is an efficient requirement to achieve their goals. However, students need to learn how to balance their academic and social lives. Having an equal part in academics, extracurricular activities, and socialization is the right approach to excelling at school. It also makes students happier and helps them form real-life skills through interactions with other people. It is time we rethink our educational system to give students enough time to pursue various interests and learn the tools they need to become productive citizens.

## Significance of the proposed project

This project is essential, especially for the education of every human being, their educational attainment, and significant specialization.

- To the Students, this study explains the importance of education to help them transition to the new normal. This includes the percentage of the students enrolled and studying.

- To the Teachers, this study shall include the shifting of teaching from in-person to online classes and how the teaching pattern and techniques can be improved so that the students can quickly adapt.

- To the Government (CHED, DepEd), this study shall seek the help of the government officials in facilitating schools on how to implement new learning strategies effectively. 

- To the Community, this study shall help enlighten them in the situation faced by educators and students.
